best practices: add index best practices (#21218)
pingcap/docs: best-practices/index-management-best-practices.md

Different TiDB nodes might experience different query workloads. An index that appears unused on some nodes might still be critical elsewhere. To segment index analysis by workload, run the following SQL statement:

```sql
SELECT INSTANCE, TABLE_NAME, INDEX_NAME, SUM(QUERY_TOTAL) AS total_queries
FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE
GROUP BY INSTANCE, TABLE_NAME, INDEX_NAME
ORDER BY total_queries DESC;
```

This helps determine whether an index is truly unused across all nodes or only for specific instances, allowing you to make informed decisions on index removal.

### Key differences between `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` and `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`

The following table shows the key differences between `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` and `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`:

| Feature          | `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`                                   | `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`                              |
| ---------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Scope            | Tracks index usage within a single database.         | Aggregates index usage across the entire TiDB cluster   |
> | Index tracking   | Data is local to each database.                      | Provides a centralized cluster-wide view                |
> | Primary use case | Debugs index usage at the database instance level    | Analyzes global index patterns and multi-node behavior  |

Reviewer: To align it with zh https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/20903
```suggestion
| Scope            | Tracks index usage within a single database instance.         | Aggregates index usage across the entire TiDB cluster.   |
| Index tracking   | Data is local to each database instance.                      | Provides a centralized cluster-wide view.               |
| Primary use case | Debugs index usage at the database instance level.    | Analyzes global index patterns and multi-node behavior.  |
```

#### Index usage data is not persisted

The `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` system table stores data in memory of each TiDB node, and is not persisted. When a TiDB node restarts, all index usage statistics from that node are cleared.

#### Track historical data

You can periodically export index usage snapshots using the following SQL statement:

```sql
SELECT * FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIDB_INDEX_USAGE INTO OUTFILE '/backup/index_usage_snapshot.csv';
```

This enables historical tracking by comparing snapshots over time, helping you detect trends in index usage and make more informed pruning decisions.

## Consolidate index usage data across TiDB nodes using `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`

Because TiDB is a distributed SQL database, query workloads are spread across multiple nodes. Each TiDB node tracks its own local index usage. For a global view of index performance, TiDB provides the [`CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`](/information-schema/information-schema-tidb-index-usage.md#cluster_tidb_index_usage) system table. This view consolidates index usage data from all TiDB nodes, ensuring that distributed query workloads are fully accounted for when optimizing indexing strategies.

> 
> Unlike `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`, which provides insights at the node level, this cluster-wide view `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` lets you do the following:
> 
> - Detect inconsistencies in index usage. For example, an index might be frequently used on some nodes while remaining unused on others.
> - Analyze global index patterns for distributed queries, ensuring indexing decisions reflect real-world workload distribution.
> - Optimize indexing strategies across all nodes, improving query efficiency for multi-node deployments.

Author: ```suggestion
```

This document describes the tools that you can use to detect and remove unused or inefficient indexes, thus improving TiDB's performance and stability.

## TiDB index optimization: a data-driven approach

Indexes are essential for query performance, but removing them without proper analysis can lead to unexpected regressions or even system instability. To ensure safe and effective index management, TiDB provides built-in observability tools that let you do the following:

- Track index usage in real-time: identify how often an index is accessed and whether it contributes to performance improvements.
- Detect unused indexes: locate indexes that have not been used since the database is last restarted.
- Assess index efficiency: evaluate whether an index filters data effectively or causes excessive I/O overhead.
- Safely test index removal: temporarily make an index invisible before deleting it to ensure no queries depend on it.

> TiDB simplifies index optimization by introducing the following powerful tools:

Author: ```suggestion
TiDB simplifies index optimization by introducing the following tools:
```

- `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`: monitors index usage patterns and query frequency.

> - `mysql.schema_unused_indexes`: lists indexes that have not been used since the database is last restarted.

Author: ```suggestion
- `sys.schema_unused_indexes`: lists indexes that have not been used since the database is last restarted.
```

| LAST_ACCESS_TIME         | datetime    | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
+--------------------------+-------------+------+------+---------+-------+
14 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

For explanations of these columns, see [`TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`](/information-schema/information-schema-tidb-index-usage.md).

### Identify unused and inefficient indexes using `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`

This section describes how to identify unused and inefficient indexes using the `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` system table.

- Unused indexes:

    - If `QUERY_TOTAL = 0`, the index has not been used by any queries.
    - If `LAST_ACCESS_TIME` shows a long time ago, the index might no longer be relevant.

- Inefficient indexes:

    - Large values in `PERCENTAGE_ACCESS_100` suggest full index scans, which might indicate an inefficient index.
    - Compare `ROWS_ACCESS_TOTAL` and `QUERY_TOTAL` to determine whether the index scans too many rows relative to its usage.

By using the `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` system table, you can gain detailed insights into index performance, making it easier to remove unnecessary indexes and optimize query execution.

### Use `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` effectively

> The following points help you use the `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` system table effectively.

Author: ```suggestion
The following points help you understand and use the `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` system table correctly.
```

#### Data updates are delayed

To minimize performance impact, `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` does not update instantly. Index usage metrics might be delayed by up to 5 minutes. Keep this latency in mind when you analyze queries.

#### Index usage data is not persisted

> The `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` system table stores data in memory, meaning it does not persist across node restarts.
> 
> When a TiDB node restarts, all index usage statistics from that node are cleared.

Author: ```suggestion
The `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` system table stores data in memory of each TiDB node, and is not persisted. When a TiDB node restarts, all index usage statistics from that node are cleared.
```

| object_schema   | object_name   | index_name         |
+---------------- + ------------- + -------------------+
| bookshop        | users         | nickname           |
| bookshop        | ratings       | uniq_book_user_idx |
+---------------- + ------------- + -------------------+
```

### Considerations when using `schema_unused_indexes`

Take the following points into consideration when you use `schema_unused_indexes`.

#### Indexes are considered unused only since the last restart

- If a TiDB node restarts, the usage tracking data is reset.
- Ensure the system has been running long enough to capture a representative workload before relying on this data.

#### Not all unused indexes can be dropped immediately

Some indexes might be rarely used but still essential for specific queries, batch jobs, or reporting tasks. Before dropping an index, consider whether it supports the following:

- Rare but essential queries, for example, monthly reports, analytics
- Batch processing jobs that do not run daily
- Ad-hoc troubleshooting queries

If the index appears in important but infrequent queries, it is recommended to keep it or make it invisible first.

> You can use [invisible indexes](#safely-test-index-removal-with-invisible-indexes) to safely test whether an index can be removed without impacting performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use [invisible indexes](#safely-test-index-removal-using-invisible-indexes) to safely test whether an index can be removed without impacting performance.
```
